---
layout: post
title:  "Atheism in 2019"
date:   2019-03-03
excerpt: "A brief look at religious sentiment in America"
tag:
- Religion
- Atheism
- Politics
- Debate
comments: false
---

# Atheism in 2019

With the current political climate in the United States, people who are usually apolitical now take
a strong stance. Those who previously been interested in politics seem to be entrenching themselves
in the closest ideology they can find. Then there are those who aren't convinced any of the
traditional parties have the correct answer.

Since the time I became interested in religion, I have noticed major swings in the public discourse.
Particularly I see the religious debate in America following closely the trends found in recent
politics.

### Old Atheism

Before the new millennium the word "atheist" was nearly a derogatory term. As the US was locked in
the cold war with a godless foe. There was a real push for religious cohesion and displays of faith.
Pledges, memorials, and affirmations became commonplace in every aspect of American life.

Public sentiment began to change, slowly at first, at the end of the 20th century. The cold war came
to a close and scientific progress was bolting ahead leaving the gods an ever shrinking dominion.
We saw a measurable rise in those who identified as non-religious, otherwise known as the
"nones". At the time, the total number was so small, you would be hard pressed to even find someone
non-religious.

### New Atheism

Then there was a major event that seemed to change the landscape: the rise of religious terrorism.
Particularly after 9/11 there was a sharp rise in those questioning and confronting religious dogma.
The best selling book lists of the 2000's saw books like "God Is Not Great", "The God
Delusion", and "The End of Faith". These starting points coupled with the rise of Youtube launched a
slew of debates from their authors. Millions turned out, tuned in, and read debates and books from
people like Christopher Hitchens, Sam Harris, and Richard Dawkins. 

This was really the first time I became interested in the topic of religion. I was certain I could
see the intervention of God in my life. Though, like many people, I had never really thought deeply
about the beliefs I held or why I had even believed them in the first place. The more I studied
philosophy and watched these debates the less certain I was. This went on for a few years until one
day I realized I no longer believed in the religious claims use to.

### Modern Religion

Although many people took a hard look at their faith, there seemed to be a growing backlash to new
atheism. There was a new wave of intelligent design, creationism, flat earth, and fundamentalism.
Some religious people disliked the direct and sometimes dismissive arguments against their
fundamental beliefs. Even some who didn't believe in God were still hesitant about being
branded an atheist, disagreeing with the tactics of new atheism and the wholesale condemnation of
religion.

This really paved the way for Jordan Peterson and the resurgence of religion. Many of his followers
see the inherent value in many religious practices. Millions still value the social cohesion, moral principals,
ceremonies, and culture winding through every religious sect.

However this does lead to a disturbing trend. With each change in public sentiment, there comes a
risk of the pendulum swinging too far. Just like the lack of nuance in the new atheism movement
there seems to be a resurgence of people reaffirming their belief in the supernatural. It is hard
for many people to accept both the fact that religion can provide benefits to society and can also
lead to dangerous dogma.

From both sides I see the same sort of parallels from politics showing up in religious discourse.
People doubling down on their side. Logical fallacies taking the place of nuanced well thought out
arguments.  Obfuscation aimed at winning favor. All of which are utterly unhelpful in discovering the
truth.
